The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Virtue and Use of Coffee With Regard to
the Plague And Other Infectious Distempers, by Richard Bradley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Virtue and Use of Coffee With Regard to the Plague And Other Infectious Distempers

Author: Richard Bradley

Release Date: September 8, 2019 [EBook #60264]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIRTUE AND USE OF COFFEE ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)







                   [Illustration: The COFFEE Tree.]




                                  THE
                            VIRTUE and USE
                                  OF
                                COFFEE,
                          With Regard to the
                               _PLAGUE_,
                               And Other
                        Infectious Distempers:

                              CONTAINING

                  The most Remarkable Observations of
                the Greatest Men in _Europe_ concerning
                  it, from the first Knowledge of it,
                      down to this Present Time.

                         To which is Prefix’d,
               An Exact Figure of the Tree, Flower, and
                      Fruit, taken from the Life.


                     By R. BRADLEY, Fellow of the
                            Royal Society.


                               _LONDON_,

             Printed by EMAN. MATTHEWS, at the _Bible_ in
            _Pater-noster-Row_; and W. MEARS, at the _Lamb_
                   without _Temple-Bar_. M.DCC.XXI.

                          (Price Six-Pence.)





                                  TO

                         The Right Honourable

                                  THE

                     Lords Spiritual and Temporal,

                         And to the Honourable

                   The COMMONS of _Great Britain_ in
                         Parliament Assembled,

                                 THIS

                                HISTORY

                                  OF

                                COFFEE

                       Is most humbly Inscribed,

                                  BY

                             Your HONOURS

                          Most Obedient, and

                    Most Humble Servant to command,


                           RICHARD BRADLEY.

[Illustration]




PREFACE.


_AT this time, when every Nation in_ Europe _is under the melancholy
Apprehension of an approaching Plague or Pestilence, I think it the
Business of every Man to contribute, to the utmost of his Capacity, such
Observations, as may tend to the Service of the Publick. Upon this foot,
I have some Months since published my Thoughts of the Plague in general,
upon an Hypothesis which many of the Learned concur with, tho’ some few
dissent from it: However, I find, that the Remedies prescribed by the
Physicians of both Opinions, are little different from each other. It is
remark’d by several Learned Men abroad, that Coffee is of excellent Use
in the time of Pestilence, and contributes greatly to prevent the
spreading of Infection: And one of them, in a Letter to me, observes,
that in some Parts of_ Turkey, _where the Plague is almost constant, it
is seldom mortal in those Families, who are rich enough to enjoy the
free Use of Coffee, but that the Poorer Sort, who want that Benefit,
seldom escape. Again, the same Person observes, that Coffee is not
subject to be destroy’d by any Insect, or is subject to rot, as most
other Seeds or Grains will do; and therefore justly concludes, that it
is of great Virtue and Use in all Distempers, which are supposed to be
occasioned by Insects, or unwholesome Air. And it is likely, if the true
Virtue and Use of Coffee had been known in_ London _in the Year 1665,
when the Plague raged there, that Dr._ Hodges, _and other Learned Men of
that time, would have recommended it. But since it is now become a
Liquor known to most people, I have thought fit to republish its
History, with several Additions and Remarks; especially how far it is
useful in Pestilential Cases, with an Account of the best Method of
roasting the Berries, and preserving them after roasting: And for the
Satisfaction of the Curious, have prefix’d a Figure of the Tree,
Flower, and Fruit, which I delineated from a growing Tree in the_
Amsterdam _Gardens._

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




AN
Historical Account
OF
_COFFEE_.


COFFEE, of late Years, is grown so much in request throughout _England_,
_Holland_, and other Parts of _Europe_, that I need say little to
recommend its History to the World: The general Use of it rather seems
to command this Work, that by our having a more familiar Knowledge of
it, we may relish it the better. And again, what yet prompts me further
to this Undertaking, is the Opportunity I have at this time to present
the World with a perfect Figure of the _Tree_ that produces this
celebrated _Fruit_; which is not done here by any random Guess, or
according to the uncertain Report of others, but drawn by my own Hand
from a growing Tree.

AND that I may observe some sort of Method in the Prosecution of my
Discourse, I shall, in the first place, give my Reader the Names and
Descriptions of it, from the several Authors who have mentioned it; and
then I shall offer a more exact Account, from my own Knowledge, of the
_Plant_, _Flower_, and _Fruit_, for the better understanding of the
aforesaid Figure: after which, I shall set down the Time and Manner of
its first Appearance in _England_, with its Virtues and Uses. To which I
shall add some necessary Observations relating to the Original Place of
its Growth, and Manner of Trading for it; and conclude with some Remarks
I have made of its Culture in the _Amsterdam_ Garden.

_JACOB COTOVICUS_, in his Travels to _Jerusalem_, _Anno 1598._ mentions
the _Coffee_ to have been at that time a Drink much in use amongst the
_Turks_; and tells us, that some of the _Arabians_ called it _Cahua_,
and others _Bunnu_ and _Bunchi_, but gives us no Description of the
Plant. He is the first Author that I find to have mentioned this Liquor.

_PROSPER ALPINUS_, a Physician of _Venice_, in his Book of _Egyptian
Plants_, makes mention of the _Tree_, and gives us an imperfect Cut of
it: He tells us, that he first saw it in a Garden belonging to a Captain
of the Janizaries at _Grand Cairo_, brought from _Arabia Felix_, and
planted there as a great Rarity: It is, saith he, like the _Euonymus_ or
_Prickle-Timber_, but with Leaves thicker, harder, and greener. Of the
Fruit (called _Buna_) the _Turks_ and _Arabs_ make a Decoction or Drink,
which they use instead of Wine, and is called _Coava_.

_PALUDAMUS_, after him, mentions it by the Name of _Choava_; and
_Rauwolfius_ calls it _Chaube_; but neither of them do make any Remarks
upon it, that are worthy to be communicated to my Reader; for these
Authors writ near a hundred Years since, when _Coffee_ was little known
to the _Europeans_.

_SANDYS_, in his Travels through the _Turkish_ Empire, met with this
Drink at _Constantinople_: He says, “It was sold in many publick Places
there, which he calls _Coffa-Houses_, where the _Turks_ sit chatting
most of the Day, and sip of a Drink called _Coffa_, in little China
Dishes, as hot as they can suffer it; black as Soot, and tasting not
much unlike it.” He believes it to be that black Broth, which was in use
amongst the _Lacedemonians_.

_PARKINSON_, in his _Theatr. Botanic._ _pag. 1622._ gives us a very
indifferent Figure of it, calling the _Tree_, _Arbor Bon_, and tells us,
the _Fruit_ is somewhat larger than a Hazel-Nut, pointed at the
Extremities, and of a greyish Ash-Colour; that each Berry contains two
white Seeds, which the _Turks_ make Drink of, and is in great Esteem
amongst them.

_JOHN BAUHINE_ calls it _Bon_ vel _Ban Arbor_.

_CASPER BAUHINE_ describes it thus; _Euonymo Similis Ægyptica fructu
Baccis Lauri simili_.

Mr. _RAY_, in his _Histor. Plantar._ _pag. 1691._ calls it _Coffee
Frutex_, _ex cujus Fructu fit Potus_. He had not seen the _Plant_, but
discourses largely on its Virtues, which I shall give an Account of in
the proper Place.

MONSIEUR _PONCETT_, in his Voyage to _Æthiopia_, makes it a Native of
that Country; it was, as he says, transplanted from thence to _Arabia
Felix_, and at this time the _Æthiopians_ cultivate it only as a
Curiosity: he describes it to be like the _Myrtle_ in its Leaves, but
larger and tufted; the _Fruit_ like _Pistachio_ Nut, green at first, and
of a darker Colour when it is ripe: and this they call _Coffee_.

MANY others have mentioned the _Fruit_ to be of a _Citron_ Colour, and
of a Greyish White: but it appears plain to me, they have never seen it
in its Prosperity, as I have done; of which my Reader may be satisfied,
when he compares such Accounts with the Description I shall give of it.

DR. _COMELIN_, _Botanick_ Professor at _Amsterdam_, in his Lectures on
_Plants_, places this _Tree_ among the _Jessamines_, and compares the
Leaf to that of our common _Chesnut_; but as that Gentleman has not yet
printed any Account of it, I shall not therefore attempt to publish the
Name at large, which he has given it. He is undoubtedly in the right to
class it with the _Jessamines_; but I rather join in Opinion with my
learned Friend Mr. _Petiver_, that the Leaf is more like to that of the
_Laurus Vulgaris_, or common _Bay_, but larger.

THUS having given a View of what has been mentioned by the several
Authors concerning the Name and Description of this _Tree_, I shall
proceed to describe it from the Knowledge I have of it.

IN the _Physick-Garden_ of _Amsterdam_ are two _Coffee-Trees_ above
seventeen foot high, which have been for some time in a bearing State,
and have, at most Seasons, _Fruit_ upon them; from one of these _Trees_
I design’d the Figure prefix’d to this Treatise, which in every Point
resembles the Branch I took it from, except only the Size, which ought
to be one third part bigger to make it equal with the Life.

THE _Tree_ is of very quick Growth, and naturally inclinable to shoot
upright; ’tis reported, that in its native Country it generally attains
to the height of forty or fifty foot, although the Stem, in the thickest
part, does not exceed five Inches in Diameter. The Leaves are
Bi-composite (or set in cross Pairs at the Joints) and not unlike those
of the common _Bay_, but curl’d at the Edges, and inclinable to hang
down. The _Flowers_ put forth in Clusters at the Joints, towards the
Extremities of the Branches; they make their first Appearance in _July_,
and are in Figure, Size, and Colour the same with those of the common
_Jessamine_, with the Addition only of five yellow _Apices_, which hang
loosely on the Top of the Flower, and a _Style_ which projects near half
an Inch above it: their Smell is faint, and little worth our Notice.

ABOUT _October_ these Trees have done blowing, and then the Green Fruit
appear, which hang on them till the _July_ following before they are
ripe; they resemble at that time the Berries of the _Lauro-Cerasus_, or
_Bay-Cherry_, and are much of the same Shape and Colour (_i.e._ of a
dark Red) but instead of a single Stone, these have two Kernels, which
split in the middle like the _Bay-berries_ of the _Shops_.

THE _Fruit_ being come to its Perfection, is gathered and prepared
either for making Drink, or for propagating other Plants. For the first
of these Uses they are spread on Mats, in the open Sun, to dry and
harden, which requires some time to accomplish; they are afterwards
rolled to and fro in rough Baskets to get off the Husks, and then tost
in an airy Place to clean them. Being thus ordered, they are ready for
the Roaster, who fits them for our Use.

MONSIEUR _BERNIER_ tells us, that in the roasting of the Berries chiefly
depends the Goodness of the Liquor; and affirms, that at _Grand Cairo_,
(where there were above a thousand _Coffee-Houses_) there was but two
Persons who rightly understood that Art.

I HAVE taken some pains to experience the best Method of roasting it,
and find none so good as by an Iron Vessel made to turn on a Spit, and
it may be roasted before a clear Fire, or over a Charcoal Fire: and here
every Berry has an equal share of Heat; and I like it roasted in a
middle way, not overburnt. I would recommend therefore the roasting of
it to every particular Family in _England_, they being then most secure
from having any damaged Berries, or any Art used to increase the Weight,
which is very injurious to the Drinkers of Coffee. Most Persons of
Distinction in _Holland_ roast their own Berries.

MONSIEUR _DU FOUR_, a Merchant of _Lyons_, in his Treatise of this
Liquor, recommends to us, that the Decoction be prepared in _Earthen_ or
_Stone_ Vessels, as preferable to those of _Tin_, _Copper_, or any other
Metal; which (says he) take from it much of its Flavour and Goodness.
And an ingenious Friend of mine observes, that Boiling of it evaporates
too much the fine Spirits; for which reason he advises us to pour
boiling Water upon the Powder, and let it stand to infuse four or five
Minutes before the Fire: and this Method, in my Judgment, much exceeds
the common way of preparing it.

SOME of the most curious Coffee-drinkers have informed me, that as soon
as they have reduced the Berries to Powder, ’tis the best way to put the
fresh-ground Coffee into the Coffee-Pot, which should be either of Stone
or Silver; and let it stand over the Fire a Minute or two, before they
pour the Water upon it: Others, who have not the Opportunity of getting
their Berries fresh roasted, recommend the drying and warming them
before the Fire, immediately before they grind them. And indeed both
these ways I find contribute greatly to the good Flavour of the Liquor;
but whether we prepare this Liquor by Decoction or Infusion, it commonly
remains thick and troubled for some Minutes after it is made, unless we
pour into it a Spoonful or two of cold Water, which immediately
precipitates the more heavy Parts to the bottom, and renders it clear
enough for drinking. In travelling I have often found my Account in
packing the Powder of fresh-roasted Coffee in Bottles, which for more
than twenty days has preserved its Strength and Goodness; which I
mention for the sake of those who have been so much used to drink Coffee
in the Morning, that they have not their Health without it, or have been
forced to take up with ill-tasted damaged Stuff in some Country Village.
I am the more careful to make this Remark, because I have sometimes been
a Sufferer on this Account, and I would advance, as much as possible,
the Content of Mankind.

THE first Knowledge and Use of _Coffee_ is not certainly known; but,
according to _Banesius_, it was discovered by mere Accident: He tells
us, “It is the common Tradition amongst the _Eastern_ People, that a
certain Keeper of Camels or Goats in _Arabia Felix_, complained to the
Religious of a Monastery in those Parts, that his Herds, twice or thrice
a Week, not only kept awake all Night long, but spent it in frisking and
dancing in an unusual manner. The Prior of the Monastery, led by his
Curiosity, and weighing the Matter, believed that this must happen from
the Food of these Creatures. Marking therefore diligently that very
Night, in company with one of his Monks, the very Place where the Goats
or Camels pastured, when they danced; found there certain Shrubs or
Bushes, on the Fruit of Berries, of which they fed. He resolved to try
the Virtues of these Berries himself; thereupon boiling them in Water,
and drinking thereof, he found, by Experience, it kept him awake in the
Night. Hence it happened that he enjoined those of his Monastery the
daily Use of it; for this procuring Watchfulness, made them more readily
and surely attend their Devotions, which they were obliged to perform in
the Night. When by this frequent use of it, they daily experienced its
Wholesomness, and how effectually it conduced to the preserving them in
perfect Health, the Drink grew in request throughout the whole Kingdom;
and, in progress of time, other Nations and Provinces of the _East_ fell
into the use of it.”[A]

THIS Story may very likely have given rise to that Opinion so generally
receiv’d amongst the _Italians_, That the Use of _Coffee_ was first
discover’d and brought out of _Asia_ into _Europe_ by some _Fryers_.

THE same Author mentions, “That some among the _Turks_, in a sort of
Thankfulness to these Monks, have sett and peculiar daily Orisons for
_Sciadly_ and _Aidrus_, which they believe are the Names of the Monks
beforemention’d.”

BUT it is a more receiv’d Opinion throughout the _Turkish Empire_, that
an _Angel_ taught the Use of this _Coffee-Drink_ to a _Mussel-man_, or
true Believer: however, of this we are certain, the Use of it was not
known in _England_, till the Year 1657; at which time Mr. _Daniel
Edwards_, a _Turkey_-Merchant, in his Return from _Smyrna_ to _London_,
brought over with him one _Pasqua Rosee_, a _Ragusean Greek_, who was
used to prepare this Liquor for him every Morning: The Novelty of it
drew so great Resort to his House, that he lost all the Fore-part of
the Day by it; insomuch that he thought it expedient to rid himself of
this Trouble, by allowing his _Greek_ Servant (in conjunction with his
Son-in-law’s _Coachman_) to make and sell it publickly. They set up
their _Coffee-House_ in _St. Michael’s Alley_ in _Cornhill_, which was
the first in _London_. But some small time after, these Partners fell
out and parted; and the _Coachman_ got leave to pitch a _Tent_ in _St.
Michael_’s Church-yard, and there to sell his _Coffee_ in opposition to
_Pasqua_, as appears by a Letter written at that time by a curious
Gentleman, who lately communicated it to me.

AND thus was the Use of _Coffee_ first introduced amongst us. The
Cheapness of it, with the Conveniencies in this Way of meeting (being
preferable to those in Taverns and Ale-Houses) soon increas’d its
Drinkers; and other _Coffee-Houses_ were set up in most Parts of the
Kingdom: so that, in a few Years, it did not only gain a general Esteem
with us, but also became one of the most valuable Commodities imported
by the _East-India_ and _Turkey_ Companies.

WE may here observe, That King _Charles_ II. finding the daily Increase
of _Coffee-Houses_, and that at those Places People were apt to talk too
freely of the State, endeavour’d the suppressing of them: but the Judges
being consulted, they declared it could not be done by Law; and only
ended in laying a Tax on them.

OF _its Vertues_; It is noted, That the _Arabs_, and others of the
_Eastern_ People, in the Summer-Season, use only a Decoction made of the
outside Husks of this _Fruit_; and in the cooler Seasons make use of the
Kernels, esteeming the first to be cooling, and the other to be of a
hotter Nature. _Veslingius_ seems to be of their opinion, in his Notes
on _Alpinus_, where he tells us, The Husk and Kernel of this _Berry_
have different Qualities; the first he esteems cold and dry, and the
latter to be moderately warm: And this Assertion is likewise confirm’d
to us, by _Peter de la Valle_.

Dr. _Lemery_ of _Paris_, speaking of _Coffee_, as it is in use amongst
the _Europeans_, tells us, It is of an excellent drying Quality,
comforts the Brain, and dries up Crudities in the Stomach. Mr. _Ray_
mentions it to be of singular Use and Efficacy to such as are afflicted
with Pains in the _Head_, _Vertigo_, _Lethargy_, and _Coughs_: it has a
good Effect on _moist_ and _cold Constitutions_; but on the other hand,
he disallows the Use of it to such as are Paralytick, and likewise such
as are troubled with _Melancholy Vapours_, or have _Hot Brains_.

OTHER Authors assert, it cures _Consumptions_, _Swooning Fits_, and the
_Rickets_; and that it helps _Digestion_, rarefies the _Blood_,
suppresses _Vapours_, gives Life and Gayety to the _Spirits_, prevents
_Sleepiness_ after eating, provokes _Urine_ and the _Catamena_. The
_Arabian_ Women drink this Liquor constantly in their Periodical Visits,
and find a good Effect from it. It contracts the _Bowels_, and confirms
the _Tone_ of the Parts, being drank after Victuals, provided it be
fresh made; for if it stands but two or three Hours, it loseth much of
its Virtue. It is prevalent in such as have _Running-Humours_, _Sores_,
or _King’s-Evil_. It is an effectual Remedy against _Worms_ in Children;
so that if the Mother drinks frequently of it when she is With-Child,
the Infant will not be troubled with Worms, during its first Years. ’Tis
allowed to be a strong _Antihypnotick_, greatly dissipating _sleepy
Vapours_, and _Fumes_ of _Wine_. ’Tis likewise useful to such as are
afflicted with _Rheumatick_ or _Gouty Humours_. The _Dutch_ Physicians
commend the Use of it in _Intermitting Fevers_, and hold it to be good
against _Infection_; because of the great Refreshment it gives the
nobler Parts of the Body, and its sudden Effect upon the Spirits, which
are wonderfully recreated by it. And it is apparently the Opinion of all
Physicians who have yet wrote concerning the Plague, That such Bodies
whose Spirits are the most overcome by Fear, are the most subject to
receive Infections. And again, That the Spirits must be refresh’d only
by such Liquors, or Preparations, as will not promote Inflammations. And
of this nature, _say they_, is Coffee, which by a right Use supports the
vital Flame, and defends the Body from Pestilential Infection. And as
such it is generally recommended, as a necessary Drink, at least twice a
day; the first thing in a Morning, and at four in the Afternoon. Now
whether the Hypothesis of venomous Animalcula brought by the Air, or
that of Aerial Atoms, poison’d and rendred unwholesom, be the Cause of
the Pestilence, will be examin’d in another Work; but at present I shall
only say, That most of the Physicians, of both Sects, prescribe the same
Methods of Prevention, and of Cure.

IT has been remark’d by several eminent Men, That in the Countries of
the _East_, where this Liquor is drank plentifully, the Inhabitants of
those Parts are seldom or never troubled with the Stone, Gout, or
Dropsy; which Distempers they imagine to be subdu’d by the powerful
Virtue of this Decoction: but whether this Drink be proper for such as
are afflicted with the Stone, I shall leave to the Judgment of the
Learned, after they have read the following Relation, which I had from a
Gentleman of _Leyden_, and what I believe may be depended upon: A Person
of that University prepared two Gallons of Coffee-Drink, after the rate
of eight Ounces of Powder to a Gallon of Water, and drew a Spirit from
it, and again distilled from that Spirit another, which he set by in
his Study, till he could find some Opportunity to try its Effects. About
eight Months pass’d before he had any Occasion to make use of it, when,
to his great Surprize, he found at the bottom of the Bottle a
Crustaceous or Petrified Matter, so very hard, and so strongly cemented
together, that, notwithstanding his great Skill in Chymistry, he was not
able to dissolve it. And this Case (I think) may well admit of farther
Enquiry, and more especially if we consider the Volatile Spirits
contain’d in Coffee to be one fourth part of the Weight of it, which
appears by so much Loss in the common Way of roasting the Berries.

I SHALL now proceed to give an Account of the Country it comes from,
with some Observations relating to the Mercantine Part.

THAT curious Gentleman, _Robert Balle_ Esq; furnish’d me with the
following Relation, as he had it from a Person that had been upon the
Place, and seen it grow: Coffee, _says he_, is not known to grow
naturally in any Part of the World, but only in _Arabia Felix_, some few
Days Journey Inland from _Moco_, in the Valleys of the _Great
Mountains_, and near the City _Saana_, about twenty Degrees
North-Latitude: The Prince of which, about eighty Years since, beat the
_Turks_ in a Battel near that Place, freed himself from their Yoke under
which he was before, and made himself Independent as at this Day,
permitting great Freedom of Trade to all Nations.

I SHALL here take occasion to remark, wherein lies the Difference
between what we call _Turkey_ and _India Coffee_, and why the latter has
not been esteemed so good as that we receive from _Turkey_.

THE first of these is bought by the _Turks Merchants_, who go up into
the Country where it grows, and there contract for the Fruit of Gardens,
or so many Trees as they have occasion for, (as our Fruit-mongers do for
Cherries in _Kent_.) When it is gathered and prepared, as I have already
mentioned, they bring it upon Camels down to _Juda_, a Port at the
bottom of the _Red-Sea_ (which is the Port to _Grand Cairo_) to be
transported to _Suez_; from thence by Land, about seventy Miles, to
_Grand Cairo_, and so down the _Nile_ to _Alexandria_, where it is
ship’d off for _Asia_ or _Europe_.

THERE commonly comes thus every Year to _Egypt_, from sixty to seventy
thousand Bales of _Coffee_; which may contain, one with the other, about
three hundred weight each.

THE Bashaw of _Cairo_ sets a Price upon it, according to its Abundance
or Scarcity, and the People there make use of it as Money in the Market,
counting so many Berries to an [B]Asper, in proportion to the Value or
Price settled by the Bashaw.

BUT that Sort, which we have under the Character of _India Coffee_, is
bought at _Bettelfukere_, where the _English_, _Dutch_, and _French_, of
late Years, send up Factors to buy the said Commodity, and bring it on
Camels to _Moco_, from whence it is shipped for _Europe_. By which means
(although it is obliged to pass the Line twice) what we now have that
way is little inferiour to _Turkey_; which was formerly the Refuse, or
what the _Turks_ left at _Bettlefukere_.

THE immense Quantity of this Fruit, which is yearly exported from this
one Country to other Parts of the World, is almost incredible; which, as
we are informed, is computed to be about a Million of Bushels, one Year
with another: and although it may seem unreasonable to believe, that
this Country alone should produce it in so great abundance, (considering
how small a Quantity can be gathered from each single Tree) yet with as
much Surprize we may admire how it is possible, that even the Number of
Bushels I have mentioned should be sufficient to answer the vast Demand
for it; since it is certain, that besides the general Esteem it has
gained all over _Europe_, it is not less requested throughout _Africa_
and _Asia_, to their utmost Bounds.

HENCE we may reasonably conjecture what vast Riches must be amass’d by
these _Arabs_, seeing they are the Proprietors of this Commodity, and
thereby command so great a Part of the Wealth of the most opulent
Countries. This part of _Arabia Felix_ is truly (as Mr. _Ray_ observes)
φερώυμος, and merits the most happy Name for its Fertility in rich
Produce. I admire, continues that Author, how so great a Treasure has
remained so long peculiar to one Country, and that neither the Envy nor
Avarice of its Neighbours have tempted them to share in this great
Advantage! But so prudent are its Masters, that on no account will they
suffer either Plant or Seed of it to come alive out of their Dominions;
taking great care to destroy the germinative Faculty of those Berries
they send abroad, and inflicting the most severe Punishments on such as
shall attempt the Transportation of any Plants of it.

BUT notwithstanding this their extraordinary Care and Caution to
preserve this Plant peculiar to themselves, the _Hollanders_, some
Years ago, found means to furnish themselves with it, and have made a
Plantation of it about _Batavia_, in the Island of _Java_, which has
already produced some Tuns of Fruit. From this Plantation they have
lately brought two Trees to _Amsterdam_, which, by the Skill of their
ingenious Gardiner, flourish and bear Fruit in such Perfection, that
several hundred Plants have been raised there from Seeds, ripened at
that Place; and which, from time to time, they transmit to _Surinam_,
and such Places in the _West-Indies_ as are in their possession.

THE Heer _Gerbrand Pancrass_, Commissary of the Garden, and _President_
of the City of _Amsterdam_, did me the Honour to accommodate me with
this great Curiosity, which I sent into _England_, and intrusted to the
care of Mr. _Thomas Fairchild_, a most accurate Gardiner at _Hoxton_.

AND since it has now found its way to _England_, it may be necessary to
offer some proper Directions for its Culture, agreeable with the Method
observed in the _Amsterdam_ Garden.

WHEN we have an Opportunity to propagate these Trees from the Berries,
we must, immediately after they are gathered, carefully take off the
outside Husk, and separate the two Seeds which are found in each; and
set them an Inch deep in Pots of fine Earth, which are already warm in a
Bed prepared with Horse-litter; keeping the Glasses close covered for
six Weeks, and often sprinkling them with Water. From this way of
Management we may expect them to come up in less than two Months time
after Sowing. And then, for their further Improvement, you are only to
remark, they love Warmth, little Air, a light sandy Earth, and much
Water. And this last Hint answers to an Observation of that Great
Naturalist Sir _Hans Sloane_; where he tells us, that the _Arabians_ cut
artificial Channels from the Rivers, on purpose to nourish these Plants.
See _Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 208. pag. 64._

THESE Rules being well observed, we may expect them to bear Fruit in
five Years time from the putting in of the Seed; but in a hotter Clime,
such as _South-Carolina_, or in the _Caribbee-Islands_, much sooner.

IF the Plague should ever come into _England_ (which God forbid) I
recommend to every Person, when they walk out, that they put in their
Mouth a little Piece of Myrrh, as an excellent Preservative from
receiving any Infection; which I shall treat of more largely in another
Work.


_FINIS._

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]


_Books Printed for_ W. MEARS, _at the_ Lamb _without_ Temple-Bar.


1. A Philosophical Account of the Works of Nature; endeavouring to set
forth the several Gradations remarkable in the Mineral, Vegetable, and
Animal Parts of the Creation; tending to the Composition of a Scale of
Life. Containing, I. An Account of the most remarkable Appearances in
Earths and Mineral Bodies. II. What is most remarkable in Plants and
Super-Plants. III. Of immoveable Shell-Fish, and of such as have local
Motion; with curious Observations on the rest of the Fish-kind, in Salt
and Fresh-Waters. IV. Of Animals and Insects, more particularly those of
the Serpent-kind; with several Observations relating to Climates,
Fruit-Trees, _&c._ with a distinct Account of such Lands in _England_ as
are stiled barren, and some Remarks relating to Fish-ponds. Also a
Description of the most curious Gardens in _Europe_, especially in
_Britain_; with some Experiments for the improving of Fruit-Trees and
Flowers, never before made publick. With Directions for the best Method
of pruning Vines, and Instructions for the most expeditious raising of
forward Fruits, with many curious Cuts.

    ---- _All their known Virtue appears
    Productive in Herb, Plant, and Nobler Birth
    Of Creatures Animate, with gradual Life
    Of Growth, Sense, Reason_---- Milton.

    By _Richard Bradley, F. R. S._


2. New Improvements of Planting and Gardening; both Philosophical and
Practical; explaining the Motion of the Sap, and Generation of Plants,
with other Discoveries never before made publick; for the Improvement of
Forest-Trees, Flower-Gardens, or Parterres: with a new Invention,
whereby more Designs of Garden-Plats may be made in an Hour, than can be
found in all the Books now extant: likewise several rare Secrets for the
Improvement of Fruit-Trees, Kitchin-Gardens, and Green House Plants.
The Third Edition corrected. By _Richard Bradley_, Fellow of the Royal
Society.


3. The Gentleman’s and Gardiner’s Kalendar; directing what is necessary
to be done every Month in the Kitchin-Garden, Fruit-Garden, Nursery,
Management of Forest-Trees, Green-House, and Flower-Garden. With
Directions for the making and ordering Hop-Grounds. By _Richard
Bradley_, F. R. S. Also the Design of a Garden-House (finely engraved
after a new manner) contrived purposely for the Good-keeping of Exotick
Plants. Sy Signior _Gallilei_ of _Florence_. The Third Edition. To which
is now added, An Abstract of the several Acts of Parliament, to
encourage the Planting of Timber-Trees, Fruit-Trees, and other Trees for
Ornament, Shelter, or Profit, and for the better Preservation of the
same, and for preventing the burning of Wood, _&c._ Price 2 _s._


4. The History of Succulent Plants; containing the Aloes, Ficoids (or
Fig-Marigolds) Torch-Thistles, Melon-Thistles, and such others as are
not capable of an _Hortus-Siccus_. Engraved, from the Originals, on
Copper-Plates, with their Descriptions and Manner of Culture. By
_Richard Bradley_, Fellow of the Royal Society.


5. The Plague at _Marseilles_ considered; with Remarks upon the Plague
in general, shewing its Cause and Nature of Infection; with necessary
Precautions to prevent the spreading of that direful Distemper.
Published for the Preservation of the People of _Great Britain_. Also
some Observations taken from an Original Manuscript of a Graduate
Physician, who resided in _London_ during the whole time of the late
Plague, _Anno 1665._ By _Richard Bradley_, F. R. S. 3d Edition. Price 1
_s._

[Illustration]


_In the Press, and Speedily will be Published_,

A Philosophical Treatise of Agriculture; or, a new Method of cultivating
and increasing of all sorts of Trees, Shrubs, and Flowers: being a very
curious Work, enriched with useful Secrets in Nature, for helping the
Vegetation of all Sorts of Trees and Plants, and for fertilizing the
most stubborn Soils. By _G. A. Agricola_, M.D. and Doctor in Philosophy
at _Ratisbonne_. Translated from the _German_, with Remarks. Adorned
with Cuts. The whole revised and compared with the Original: Together
with a Preface, confirming this new Method. By _Richard Bradley_, F. R.
S.

[Illustration]


FOOTNOTES:

[A] _See Discourse on Coffee_, p. 4, 5.

[B] _A small_ Turkish _Coin, worth about three Farthings._








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Virtue and Use of Coffee With
Regard to the Plague And Other In, by Richard Bradley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIRTUE AND USE OF COFFEE ***

***** This file should be named 60264-0.txt or 60264-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/2/6/60264/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
